## Median Phytoplankton Size

**About the Indicator**  
Phytoplankton are the base of the food web and their abundance
influences the food available to all higher trophic levels from
zooplankton through tuna and billfish. Sea surface temperature and ocean
color data can be combined to estimate median phytoplankton size.
Changes to median phytoplankton can propagate through the food web and
influence fish size structure, weight-per-unit-effort, and the bigeye
tuna recruitment index. Furthermore, median phytoplankton size can be
combined with the recruitment index to forecast bigeye tuna catch rates
up to four years in advance.

Some studies project that climate change will result in both fewer and
smaller phytoplankton. This would reduce the food available to all
members of the food web.

Understanding variability and trends in phytoplankton abundance and size
structure, how they are influenced by oceanographic conditions, and how
they influence fish abundance and size structure are areas of active
research.

**Status of the Indicator**  
The mean monthly phytoplankton cell size was 1.5 *μ*m Equivalent
Spherical Diameter (ESD) in 2022. Monthly mean cell size ranged from
1.18–1.75 *μ*m ESD during the year, within the range of values observed
over the period of record (1.15–1.89 *μ*m ESD). Over the period of
record, there has been weakly significant decline in monthly median
phytoplankton size. Over the time series, median phytoplankton size has
declined by 0.087 *μ*m ESD, or by 5.4%. The monthly anomaly has declined
as well, by 0.07 *μ*m ESD. Average estimated median phytoplankton size
was below average across much of the fishing grounds.

**Indicator Data**  
Description: Median phytoplankton cell size can be estimated from
satellite remotely sensed SST and ocean color (Barnes et al. 2011). A
time series of monthly median phytoplankton cell size averaged over the
Hawaiʻi longline region is presented, as well as a time series of
anomalies. NOAA CoralTemp (see SST indicator) and ESA CCI data (see
ocean color indicator) are used to calculate median phytoplankton cell
size.

Timeframe: Monthly

Region: Hawaii longline region: 15° – 45°N, 180° – 120°W

Measurement Platform: Satellite

Data available at:
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/md50_exp>

Sourced from: Barnes et al. (2011) and NOAA OceanWatch (2023c). Graphics
produced in part using Stawitz (2022).

**References**  
Barnes et al. (2011): Barnes, C., Irigoien, X., De Oliveira, J.A.A.,
Maxwell, D., and S. Jennings, 2011. Predicting marine phytoplankton
community size structure form empirical relationships with remotely
sensed variables. Journal of Plankton Research, 33(1), pp. 13-24. doi:
10.1093/plankt/fbq088

NOAA OceanWatch (2023a):
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/CRW_sst_v3_1_monthly>
Accessed: 10 April 2023

NOAA OceanWatch (2023b):
<https://oceanwatch.pifsc.noaa.gov/erddap/griddap/esa-cci-chla-monthly-v6-0>
Accessed: 10 April 2023 & 3 May 2023.

Stawitz C (2022): nmfspalette: A Color Palette for NOAA Fisheries. R
package version 0.0.0.9000.
<https://nmfs-fish-tools.github.io/nmfspalette/>
